Title: The Effects of Makerspace Learning on the Social Interactions among Students with Emotional or Behavioral Disorder
Author: Gomez, Alvaro
Degree: Ph.D. Dissertation
Institution: The University of Texas at San Antonio
Year: 2019
ERIC Number: ED604859
ISBN: 978-1-3921-8084-6
Pages: 222
Source URL: https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED604859

NOTE: Full text is behind a ProQuest paywall and not freely available. ERIC references this as a ProQuest LLC publication.
This file contains the abstract only from the ERIC record.
Copies may be obtained by calling 1-800-521-0600 or via http://www.proquest.com/en-US/products/dissertations/individuals.shtml

---ABSTRACT---

Students with disabilities benefit from opportunities where skills learned through direct instruction can be practiced and experienced within nontraditional social contexts. Direct instruction methods are important in special education, however one of the challenges with it is that students with disabilities might not gain the understanding to generalize skills across varying contexts (Yuen, Mason, & Gomez, 2014). Strategies based on constructionist principles provide opportunities for students to generalize understanding to new situations. Students with emotional or behavioral disorder significant enough to place them at special education campuses, typically do not have access to these nontraditional opportunities. This study looked at the effect participation in a nontraditional learning lab founded on constructionist principles (a makerspace), had on the social competencies of students with emotional or behavior disorder assigned to a special education campus. The study took place at a South-Texas special education campus that supports students with emotional or behavioral disorders and enlisted the participation of four middle school students with social skill goals in their individualized education plan. Using a single-case experiment with a multielemental design, this study measured the difference between the effects both a makerspace and traditional classroom had on student interactions. Applying a conceptual framework involving constructionist learning theory, this study demonstrated that a social-emotional competency learning lab can support students in building up their social interactions. This study provides empirical evidence for the theory of constructionism as well as testifies to the social validity of using nontraditional educational settings at special education campuses.

Descriptors: Students with Disabilities, Teaching Methods, Direct Instruction, Special Education, Generalization, Emotional Disturbances, Behavior Disorders, Middle School Students, Conventional Instruction, Interaction, Interpersonal Relationship, Shared Resources and Services
