RESEARCH ARTICLE

Stemming on STEM: A STEM Education Framework for
Students with Disabilities
Jiwon Hwang
California State University, Bakersfield
jwluv1001@gmail.com

Jonte C. Taylor
The Pennsylvania State University
jct215@psu.edu

Abstract: There has been increased attention paid to science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics also known as STEM. The focus on STEM has been both educational and
occupational. Unfortunately, students with disabilities perform below their peers without
disabilities in math and science. The authors discuss issues related to STEM and students with
disabilities. These issues include (1) traditional views of STEM education, (2) the importance
of STEM education, and (3) students with disabilities performance in STEM. The authors posit
a framework for STEM education for students with disabilities and promote the incorporation
of the arts to increase students’ STEM knowledge and achievement.
Keywords: STEM, science, mathematics, arts, STEAM, disabilities, education
WHAT IS STEM?
In recent years there has been increased
attention paid to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics across diverse
fields of research and practice, framed as
the acronym “STEM”. Although these four
disciplines have been banded together under
the same umbrella, there eludes consensus
of the extent of their interconnectedness
with some positing that they are separate
knowledge bases (Bell & Lederman, 2003;
Clough, 2000) and others contending that
they are bridged (Kaufman, 2003; Morrison,
2006). Although researchers, practitioners,
policy makers, curriculum developers, and
others have defined STEM in various ways
to adjust its use in their fields, STEM has
been widely used as the generic label of a
higher category spanning four areas across

various fields (e.g., education, business, and
events/programs) (Kuenzi, 2008; Morrison
& Raymond, 2009; Johnson, 2012). As a
result, STEM is now universally perceived
as referring to one or several areas of the
four disciplines.
According to Zollman (2012), the comprehensive purposes of STEM are to address
societal and personal needs to be a fulfilled citizenry. Students who are STEM
proficient prepare the nation to be a global
leader in an increasingly global economy
(Hughes, 2010). In addition to the importance of STEM from a global perspective,
teaching and learning STEM disciplines
are also valuable in enhancing the quality
of daily life for students, especially for
39

Vol. 19, No. 1 - 2016
Journal of Science Education for Students with Disabilities

those with disabilities. Students who have
advanced knowledge in STEM are more
likely to have greater work-related opportunities (Basham & Marino, 2010). According
to the U.S. Department of Education (2015),
up to 62% of the fastest growing careers
require proficient knowledge or skills in
STEM-related areas (Basham & Marino,
2013; Kaku, 2011). Moreover, knowledge in
STEM helps students to live a better quality
of life because STEM is fully embedded in
daily life situations (e.g., calculating tips,
using electronic devices such as smartphones and iPads, and using chemicals such
as shampoos and candles).
However, U.S. students tend to avoid
majoring in STEM areas (Apedoe, Reynolds,
Ellefson, & Schunn, 2008; Basalyga, 2003;
Lam, Doverspike, Zhao, Zhe, & Menzemer,
2008). According to a report from the
American College Testing (ACT, 2015),
although students’ interest in STEM has been
slightly increased by 1% in the recent fiveyear trajectory, the percentage of students’
interest in science has been continuously
decreased by one percent. Consequently,
approximately 50% of high school graduates
failed to meet the college readiness benchmark (ACT, 2015). Students tend to experience significant difficulties, particularly in
mathematics and science, from elementary
school through college, which continuously
builds negative views of STEM. As shown
in the National Report Card from 2009 to
2015, the majority of students nationwide did
not successfully reach an adequate level of
proficiency (e.g., 67% and 68% of 8th grade
students were below proficient in mathematics and science, respectively). The situation
appears even more severe when performance
in mathematics and science is compared

40

internationally. The Program for International Student Assessment (PISA, 2012), the
U.S. ranked 35th in mathematics and 27th in
science out of 64 countries (Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development
[OECD], 2013). The severity of the performances for students with disabilities is even
greater when compared to their peers. While
comparing international scores of students
with disabilities is virtually impossible due
to varying definitions for determining disability, nationally, students with disabilities
perform significantly lower than their peers
without disabilities (Aronin & Floyd, 2013;
Basham & Marino, 2013; National Center
for Education Statistics, 2013).
Recognizing the crisis in the U.S., there have
been active movements to prepare future
generations by equipping them with a higher
quality of STEM education. Recently, President Barack Obama (2009) made STEM education a priority and called for an increase
in the number of students and teachers who
are proficient in these fields with hopes of
improving international performance. As a
result, the U.S. government allocated a large
amount in federal, state, and local budgets
to support teachers and students to promote
proficiency in STEM disciplines and education reform, with emphasis in K-12 education. Although research in STEM disciplines
for students with disabilities is still growing,
practical guidelines for teachers in inclusive
and non-inclusive settings have been suggested and developed to enhance students’
success and accessibility to STEM (Basham
& Marino, 2010; Dunn, Rabren, Taylor, &
Dotson, 2012; Ludlow, 2013).

Stemming on STEM: A STEM Education Framework for Students with Disabilities

Educational Perspectives on STEM:
Interdisciplinary Approach

good use of STEM knowledge (“what you
can do with what you know”).

Regardless of its importance, however,
“STEM” is still a buzzword in education
that is ambiguous and has no clear definition
or framework. There have been numerous
attempts to recognize and interpret STEM in
educational perspectives. Some researchers
have referred to STEM education as a broad
education category involving math, science,
engineering, or technology education; thus,
teaching any one of the four disciplines can
simply be referred to as STEM education
(Cotabish, Dailey, Robinson, & Hughes,
2013; Watt, Therrien, Kaldenberg, & Taylor,
2013). Others consider STEM education to be
the use of technology as a part of the instructional tools (e.g., iPad, pc) used in education
(Aronin & Floyd, 2013). These perspectives
consider STEM to be simply an acronym for
grouping four disciplines without any relationship among four interwoven domains.

Some studies have made efforts to define
STEM education as an integrative approach
and explored various ways to implement it in
a curriculum. According to Sanders (2009),
integrative STEM approaches are “approaches
that explores teaching and learning between/
among any two or more of the STEM subject
areas and/or between a STEM subject and
one or more other school subjects (p. 21).”
Moreover, other researchers defined STEM
education as a meta-disciplinary approach
or interdisciplinary approach, meaning the
teaching of the separate disciplines of STEM
as one cohesive entity to solve real-world
problems (Breiner, Harkness, Johnson, &
Koehler, 2012; Labov, Reid, & Yamamoto,
2010). These points of view see the notion
of STEM education as not being limited to
mere integration of the four disciplines of
STEM (e.g., teaching several disciplines at
the same time), but the provision of students
with the best practices to solve complex reallife problems with integrative thinking. The
ultimate goal of learning STEM disciplines is
to build a well-integrated knowledge base that
will be a benefit not only in students’ careers
but also in the quality of their daily life.

However, in order to establish an educational
system to promote better student performance in STEM disciplines, STEM education needs to be re-conceptualized. Because
each of the four disciplines have always been
a part of educational curriculums, allocating
more teaching time is not enough to break
out of the current academic crisis. Rather
than referring to STEM education only as
teaching one or several areas of the four disciplines, how to teach STEM in a curriculum
effectively to students needs to be embraced.
In other words, STEM education should be
framed as an interdisciplinary instructional
approach when teaching STEM-related
content. In this sense, teachers should not
only focus on STEM content knowledge
(“what you know”) but how students make

Reflecting the definitions and suggestions
in previous research, the authors operationally define STEM education as follows:
an interdisciplinary approach when (1)
teaching between/among any two or more
of STEM disciplines or (2) teaching any of
the STEM disciplines integrated with other
school subjects designed to prepare students
to be equipped with the knowledge and
skills to solve complex real-world problems.
The authors view STEM education as an

41

Vol. 19, No. 1 - 2016
Journal of Science Education for Students with Disabilities

instructional approach, so the emphasis is
mainly on how to teach STEM-related content
most effectively to students with disabilities.
Instead of teaching and learning STEM disciplines through isolated and de-contextualized
facts (Basham, Israel, & Maryland, 2010;
Israel, Maynard, & Williamson, 2013), this
idea breaks down the solid boundary among
the disciplines and recognizes them as a
unitary idea (Morrison & Raymond, 2009).
Teaching Students with Disabilities Using
a STEM Interdisciplinary Approach
Recognizing that students with disabilities struggle in the STEM disciplines significantly more than their peers, promising
instructional strategies and/or interventions
have been developed for students with disabilities to enhance their performance in
each of the STEM disciplines (e.g., Jitendra,
DiPipi, & Perron-Jones, 2002; Scheuermann,
Deshler, & Schumaker, 2009; Watt et al.,
2013). Although there is a significant lack of
research about STEM education for students
with disabilities, researchers have started to
pay attention to how meeting their special
needs can fit into the design of instructional plans. Recently, Teaching Exceptional
Children, one of the most influential journals
in special education, published a special
issue about STEM education to explore
various ways to support students with disabilities in the K-12 educational system. In
the issue, Basham and Marino (2013) noted
that the foundation of STEM education lies
in engineering and suggested the Universal
Design for Learning (UDL) as a curriculum
design framework to implement STEM education for students with disabilities; Israel et
al. (2013) and Kennedy and Wexler (2013)
explored the connection among content

42

literacy, reading, and STEM and offered recommendations to create a literacy-embedded STEM for teachers; Aronin and Floyd
(2013) incorporated technology components
by using iPads and apps in teaching STEM;
and, finally, Moorehead and Grillo (2013)
explored instructional commonality when
teaching both mathematics and science and
implemented a co-teaching method to benefit
students in STEM learning. All these efforts
viewed STEM education as an interdisciplinary approach emphasizing active collaboration among STEM disciplines and expanded
it to make a connection with other subject
disciplines as well (e.g., reading, literacy).
From STEM to STEAM: Adding the Arts
to STEM for Students with Disabilities
Considering students’ frustration from
unpleasant and/or unsuccessful experiences
in STEM disciplines, some researchers suggested students’ motivation in learning
STEM disciplines needs to be additionally considered within the interdisciplinary
framework (Daugherty, 2013; Platz, 2007;
Yakman, 2010). They argued that STEM education should be expanded to embrace and
integrate with the disciplines of the arts in
order to facilitate and promote accessibility
of STEM learning. The arts include the areas
of performing arts (i.e. dance, music, and
theatre), presenting arts (i.e. visual arts), and
producing arts (i.e. media arts), as described
by the National Council for Core Arts Standards (2014). From this perspective, we
believe STEM + ‘A’ (STEAM) should benefit
students with disabilities as follows.
First, using instructional components from
the arts can stimulate students’ motivation in pursuing difficult topics in STEM

Stemming on STEM: A STEM Education Framework for Students with Disabilities

disciplines. As opposed to disciplines that
require students to achieve a certain level at
a certain time, the nature of the arts is relatively liberal and focuses more on creativity
than getting a standardized correct answer,
and they are often considered as an arena for
self-expression. Thus, integrating the arts can
lower the threshold of learning STEM disciplines because it facilitates student access to
STEM knowledge. For example, teaching
and learning the concept of fractions is difficult because students need to understand the
relationship between two numbers above and
below a short horizontal line (i.e., numerator
and denominator); that the intuitive understanding of whole numbers does not hold
true in fractions makes it even more difficult. In order to help students with disabilities
who have nearly given up on learning this
complex notion, teachers can bring musical
components into a mathematics classroom.
Instead of teaching a complex array of

fraction concepts, engage students in musical
activities such as playing drums with various
beats (e.g., ½ and ¾). Students will become
familiar with fractions-related concepts inadvertently throughout this type of activity, then
teachers can make a connection to mathematics by explaining how to express the beats
that were played in the most simple and convenient way. As another example, connecting science instruction to the concept maps
and graphic organizers as a visual support
can be considered as visual arts. Students
allowed to create their own visual representations of science concepts allows students to
be visually creative and provides teachers an
opportunity to determine what students may
or may not have learned. Graphic organizers
and concept maps have shown to be a successful visual tool for students with disabilities (see Figure 1 for examples of graphic
organizers).

Figure 1: Four examples of graphic organizers as visual supports.

43

Vol. 19, No. 1 - 2016
Journal of Science Education for Students with Disabilities

Second, the arts play critical roles as scaffolds
to help students with disabilities to get into
an abstract world. STEM disciplines often
contain abstract concepts (Brigham, Scruggs,
& Mastropieri, 2011) that require understanding of theoretical properties beyond what
students can manipulate on a practical level
(Witzel, Mercer, & Miller, 2003). Due to
the poor cognitive abilities and related skills
students with disabilities have been shown
to have, it is important to provide scaffolds
with student-participation activities that can
simplify abstract concepts in order to develop
precursor concepts (Devlin, 2000). Activities
related to the arts can be used as a gateway
to facilitate STEM learning. McGrath &
Brown (2005) suggested that the visual arts
were beneficial as an instructional method
for enhancing students’ learning by stimulating the higher cognitive parts of brain.
Others also have also proved that manipulation of concrete objects and pictorial images
remediates students’ cognitive flows and
helps students’ understanding when working
with abstract concepts. For example, one of
the evidence-based mathematics strategies
when teaching word-problem solving is the
Concrete-Representational-Abstract (CRA)
graduate sequence of instruction.
The logic behind the CRA is that transforming abstract concepts into concrete and representational levels gives students sufficient
opportunities to experience the concepts
with visualized images and manipulatives.
This should be framed within STEM education integrated with the arts. Using multimodal representations (see Figure 2) as a
visual art and movement/dance as a performance art means of having students demonstrate science concepts or processes. For
example, students may be able to draw a

44

picture of an experiment they did to explain
the phenomenon of momentum or students
may be able perform the process of the water
cycle through movement.

Figure 2: List of multimodal representations for
use as visual supports.

CONCLUSION
As emphasis is placed on STEM education as a
means for future success, the needs of students
with disabilities need to be considered. The
authors posit that by integrating the arts in
STEM education, thereby transforming it to
STEAM, students with disabilities are granted
increased access to STEM success. As such,
the authors suggest a new framework to demonstrate how STEM education should take
place in a special education classroom setting
(see Figure 3). The comprehensive goals are
to (1) teach problem-solving skills within
science contexts (e.g., problem stories about
the velocity of a car, body temperatures, probability genetics, chemicals), (2) generalize problem-solving skills when engaging in hands-on
activities in an engineering classroom (e.g.,
making a skateboard by measuring and calculating), (3) increase student motivation by

Stemming on STEM: A STEM Education Framework for Students with Disabilities

integrating art and music components into a
lesson to facilitate the problem-solving process
(e.g., sketching pictorial images, frequency
and pitch of sound), (4) promote flexibility in
using various types of technology whenever
needed (e.g., iPads, apps, calculators, PowerPoint), and, ultimately, (5) always make a connection to the real world. The problem-solving

process within the framework the authors
propose provides a practical basis for teachers
to teach STEM in an integrative manner and
also provides students with disabilities sufficient authentic experiences. The authors expect
students with disabilities to be equipped with
content knowledge and skills to solve complex
problems in the real world.

Figure 3: Conceptual framework for an interdisciplinary approach to STEAM education for students
with disabilities.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors have included a list of organizations and groups that focus supports on
one or more of the following areas: science,
mathematics, the arts, or students with disabilities (see Figure 4).

45

Vol. 19, No. 1 - 2016
Journal of Science Education for Students with Disabilities

Figure 4: List of organizations and groups that focus on students with disabilities or components of STEAM.

REFRENCES
American College Testing (2015). The
condition of college & career readiness.
Retrieved from http://www.act.org/
research/policymakers/cccr13/stem.html
Apedoe, X. S., Reynolds, B., Ellefson, M.
R., & Schunn, C. D. (2008). Bringing
engineering design into high school
science classrooms: The heating/cooling
unit. Journal of science education and
technology, 17(5), 454–465.
Aronin, S., & Floyd, K. K. (2013). Using an
iPad in inclusive preschool classrooms
to introduce STEM concepts. Teaching
Exceptional Children, 45(4), 34-39.

46

Basalyga, S. (2003). Student interest in
engineering is on decline. Daily Journal
of Commerce. Retrieved from http://
findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_ qn4184/
is_20030611/ai_n1004581/
Basham, J. D., Israel, M., & Maynard, K.
(2010). An ecological model of STEM
education: Operationalizing STEM
for all. Journal of Special Education
Technology, 25(3), 9.
Basham, J. D., & Marino, M. T. (2013).
Understanding STEM education
and supporting students through
universal design for learning. Teaching
Exceptional Children, 45(4), 8-15.

Stemming on STEM: A STEM Education Framework for Students with Disabilities

Basham, J. D., & Marino, M. T. (2010).
Introduction to the topical issue:
Shaping STEM education for all
students. Journal of Special Education
Technology, 25(3), 1.
Becker, K., & Park, K. (2011). Effects
of integrative approaches among
science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) subjects on
students’ learning: A preliminary metaanalysis. Journal of STEM Education:
Innovations and Research, 12(5/6), 23.
Bell, R. L., & Lederman, N. G. (2003).
Understandings of the nature of science
and decision making on science and
technology based issues. Science
Education, 87(3), 352-377.
Breiner, J. M., Harkness, S. S., Johnson, C.
C., & Koehler, C. M. (2012). What is
STEM? A discussion about conceptions
of STEM in education and partnerships.
School Science and Mathematics,
112(1), 3-11
Brigham, F. J., Scruggs, T. E., &
Mastropieri, M. A. (2011). Science
education and students with learning
disabilities. Learning Disabilities
Research & Practice, 26(4), 223-232.
Clough, M. P. (2000). The nature of science:
Understanding how the game of science
is played. The Clearing House: A
Journal of Educational Strategies,
Issues and Ideas, 74(1), 13-17.

Cotabish, A., Dailey, D., Robinson, A.,
& Hughes, G. (2013). The effects of
a STEM intervention on elementary
students’ science knowledge and skills.
School Science and Mathematics,
113(5), 215-226.
Daugherty, M. K. (2013). The Prospect of
an” A” in STEM Education. Journal
of STEM Education: Innovations and
Research, 14(2), 10.
Devlin, K. (2000). The language of
mathematics: Making the invisible
visible. New York, NY: Henry Holt and
Company.
Dunn, C., Rabren, K. S., Taylor, S. L., &
Dotson, C. K. (2012). Assisting students
with high-incidence disabilities to
pursue careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. Intervention in School and Clinic, 48(1),
47-54.
Hughes, B. (2010). Park Forest Middle
School STEM Education Fair 2010.
Technology and Engineering Teacher,
70(2), 32-35.
Israel, M., Maynard, K., & Williamson, P.
(2013). Promoting literacy-embedded,
authentic STEM instruction for students
with disabilities and other struggling
learners. Teaching Exceptional
Children, 45(4), 18-25.

47

Vol. 19, No. 1 - 2016
Journal of Science Education for Students with Disabilities

Jitendra, A., DiPipi, C. M., & PerronJones, N. (2002). An exploratory study
of schema-based word- problemsolving instruction for middle school
students with learning disabilities:
An emphasis on conceptual and
procedural understanding. The Journal
of Special Education, 36(1), 23–38.
doi:10.1177/0022466902036 0010301
Johnson, C. C. (2012). Implementation of
STEM education policy: Challenges,
progress, and lessons learned. School
Science and Mathematics, 112(1), 45-55.
Kaku, M. (2012). Physics of the future: How
science will shape human destiny and
our daily lives by the year 2100. New
York, NY: Anchor.
Kaufman, D., Moss, D., & Osborn, T.
(2003). Beyond the boundaries: A
trans-disciplinary approach to learning
and teaching. Praeger, Westport,
Connecticut:
Kennedy, M. J., & Wexler, J. (2013).
Helping Students Succeed within
Secondary-Level STEM Content Using
the “T” in STEM to Improve Literacy
Skills. Teaching Exceptional Children,
45(4), 26-33.
Kuenzi, J. (2008, March 21). Science,
Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) Education:
Background, Federal Policy, and
Legislative Action. Retrieved from
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/
crsdocs/35

48

Labov, J. B., Reid, A. H., & Yamamoto,
K. R. (2010). Integrated biology and
undergraduate science education: a new
biology education for the twenty-first
century? CBE-Life Sciences Education,
9(1), 10-16.
Lam, P. C., Doverspike, D., Zhao, J., Zhe,
J., & Menzemer, C. C. (2008). An
evaluation of a STEM program for
middle school students on learning
disability related IEPs. Journal of STEM
education, 9(1/2), 21.
Ludlow, B. (2013). Growing STEM as
a pathway to the future. Teaching
Exceptional Children, 45(4), 4.
McGrath, M. B., & Brown, J. R. (2005).
Visual learning for science and
engineering. Computer graphics and
applications, IEEE, 25(5), 56-63.
Morrison, J. S. (2006). Attributes of STEM
education: The students, the academy,
the classroom. Teaching Institute for
Excellence in STEM (TIES) STEM
Education Monograph Series.
Morrison, J., & Raymond, V. (2009). STEM
as a Curriculum. Education Week, 23.
Retrieved from http://www.edweek.org/
ew/section/opinion/index.html
Moorehead, T., & Grillo, K. (2013).
Celebrating the Reality of Inclusive
STEM Education Co-Teaching in
Science and Mathematics. Teaching
Exceptional Children, 45(4), 50-57.

Stemming on STEM: A STEM Education Framework for Students with Disabilities

National Center for Education Statistics
(2013). National assessment of
educational progress (NAEP) 2011
science assessments. Washington,
D. C.: United States Department of
Education.
National Coalition for Core Arts Standards
(2014) National Core Arts Standards.
Dover, DE: State Education Agency
Directors of Arts Education. Retrieved
from http://www.nationalartsstandards.
org.
Obama, B. (2009). Remarks by the
President on the “Education to
Innovate” Campaign. Retrieved from
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-pressoffice/remarks-president-educationinnovate-campaign
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD). (2013).
PISA 2012 Assessment and analytical
framework: Mathematics, reading,
science, problem solving and
financial literacy, OECD Publishing.
Retrieved from http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/9789264190511-en.
Platz, J. (2007). How do you turn STEM
into STEAM? Add the arts. Columbus:
Ohio Alliance for Arts Education, 1-5.

Scheuermann, A. M., Deshler, D. D., &
Schumaker, J. B. (2009). The effects
of the explicit inquiry routine on the
performance of students with learning
disabilities on one-variable equations.
Learning Disability Quarterly, 32(2),
103–120.
Thompson, R., & Bolin, G. (2011).
Indicators of Success in STEM Majors:
A Cohort Study. Journal of College
Admission, 212, 18-24.
Watt, S. J., Therrien, W. J., Kaldenberg, E.,
& Taylor, J. (2013). Promoting inclusive
practices in inquiry-based science
classrooms. Teaching Exceptional
Children, 45(4), 40.
Witzel, B. S., Mercer, C. D., & Miller,
M. D. (2003). Teaching algebra to
students with learning difficulties: An
investigation of an explicit instruction
model. Learning Disabilities Research
& Practice, 18(2), 121-131.
Yakman, G. (2010). STEAM: A framework
for teaching across the disciplines.
Zollman, A. (2012). Learning for STEM
literacy: STEM literacy for learning.
School Science and Mathematics,
112(1), 12-19.

Sanders, M. (2009). STEM, STEM
education, STEM mania. Technology
Teacher, 68(4), 20–26.

49

