SOURCE: https://www.uis.no/sites/default/files/inline-images/Mindset%20Theory.pdf
TITLE: [PDF] Mindset Theory and School Psychology

Canadian Journal of School Psychology
﻿1­–18
© The Authors 2021 
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions 
DOI: 10.1177/08295735211053961
journals.sagepub.com/home/cjs
Article
Mindset Theory and  
School Psychology
Aamena Kapasi1
 and Jacqueline Pei1
Abstract
Mindset theory is an achievement motivation theory that centers on the concept 
of the malleability of abilities. According to mindset theory, students tend to have 
either a growth mindset or a fixed mindset about their intelligence; students with a 
growth mindset tend to believe that intelligence is malleable, whereas students with 
fixed mindsets tend to believe that intelligence is unchangeable. As described in many 
empirical and theoretical papers, the mindset a student holds can influence important 
psychological and behavioral factors, including reaction to failure, persistence and level 
of effort, and expectations of success, which ultimately impact academic achievement. 
Importantly, mindsets can be changed, and interventions have been developed 
to promote a more growth mindset. A growth mindset allows students to view 
challenges as an opportunity for improvement, is linked to enjoyment of learning, and 
increases motivation in school. School psychologists are often working with students 
with learning differences and/or mental health concerns who are particularly at-risk 
for poor academic achievement, and researchers have demonstrated the important 
impact a growth mindset can have for these vulnerable students. School psychologists 
are well-positioned to incorporate mindset theory into the school environment in 
order to best support the students they serve. In this paper we provide a theoretical 
overview of mindset theory and mindset interventions, and specifically review the 
literature on mindset theory for individuals with learning disabilities and mental 
health challenges. We discuss how school psychologists can incorporate mindset 
theory into their practice to support the shift from a fixed to a growth mindset for 
all students.
Keywords
mindset theory, school psychologists/counselors, education professionals, motivation, 
personality/individual differences, strengths
1University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
Corresponding Author:
Aamena Kapasi, Department of Educational Psychology, University of Alberta, 6-102 Education North, 
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada. 
Email: kapasi@ualberta.ca
1053961 CJSXXX10.1177/08295735211053961Canadian Journal of School PsychologyKapasi and Pei
research-article2021

2 
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 00(0)
Mindset theory is an increasingly popular theory of achievement motivation that 
has made its way into many Canadian classrooms. Numerous resources, websites, 
and programs have been developed based on this theory identifying the power of 
beliefs and how our beliefs can influence our motivation and achievement. Although 
applied to various settings, including sports (Zanin et al., 2020) and business 
(Canning et al., 2020), mindset theory has been most influential in the field of edu-
cation. Interventions have been incorporated into educational settings across the 
world with the hope of targeting student’s beliefs about their intelligence. School 
psychologists are well-positioned to support this momentum by assisting school 
staff, parents, and students in understanding and implementing mindset theory. In 
this paper, we (1) provide an overview of mindset theory and interventions, (2) 
examine the role of mindset theory in supporting students with  learning disabilities 
and those with mental health concerns, and (3) outline key considerations for school 
psychologists and provide an argument for the inclusion of mindset theory in the 
work of school psychologists.
Theoretical Overview
Mindset theory describes core assumptions about the malleability of personal qualities 
(Dweck & Leggett, 1988). The theory represents a social-cognitive approach that stems 
from goals and goal-oriented behavior and relates to individual differences in beliefs 
and values (Dweck & Leggett, 1988). Evolving from its roots in understanding chil-
dren’s perceptions of their intelligence in school settings, mindset theory informs how 
we understand responses to challenges or setbacks (Yeager & Dweck, 2020). Early 
efforts to understand how children respond to a challenge revealed two patterns of per-
formance: mastery-oriented and helpless responses (Dweck & Leggett, 1988). The 
helpless response is characterized by avoidance of challenges and difficulty facing 
obstacles. In contrast, the mastery-oriented pattern involves seeking challenging tasks 
and persistence after failure.
Seeking to explain these patterns, Dweck and colleagues posited that there may be 
a difference in achievement goals underlying the observed behavior (Elliot & Dweck, 
1988). Some students see achievement situations as a test of their ability (i.e., perfor-
mance goals), while others see them as learning opportunities which may increase 
their ability or understanding (i.e., mastery or learning goals) (Elliott & Dweck, 1988). 
Students with mastery goals tend to confront challenge, show more effort, optimism, 
and effective strategizing (Elliott & Dweck, 1988). Alternatively, those with perfor-
mance goal orientations tend to focus on demonstrating competence, obtaining posi-
tive judgments of one’s ability and avoiding negative ones, and using social comparison 
standards (Schunk et al., 2008). Individuals with performance goal orientations are 
also more vulnerable to helpless responses (Dweck & Leggett, 1988). These individu-
als may avoid activities that pose a risk of failure or errors, and demonstrate more 
self-blame, negative affect, and impaired problem-solving strategies (Elliott & Dweck, 
1988).

Kapasi and Pei 
3
Implicit Theories of Intelligence
But why do children develop different learning goals? Dweck and colleagues recog-
nized that our beliefs associated with our perceived capacities have a significant 
impact on our ability to navigate, and even benefit, from difficulties or failures we 
might experience (Yeager & Dweck, 2020). Different theories about one’s abilities 
orients individuals to different goals, which in turn relate to different patterns of 
behavior. Two self-theories emerged from this research that mapped onto achievement 
goals; entity theorists were associated with a performance goal orientation, and incre-
mental theorists were related to mastery goals (Dweck & Leggett, 1988). Integration 
of this thinking was initially named Implicit Theories of Intelligence (ITOI) but recog-
nizing that this theory can be applied to any aspect of the self, ITOI is now commonly 
referred to as Mindset Theory (Dweck, 2006).
Mindset theory organizes our capacity beliefs into two broad groups—a fixed 
mindset and a growth mindset. A fixed mindset, originally called an entity theory of 
intelligence, describes the belief that one’s intelligence is not under one’s control 
(Dweck & Leggett, 1988). A fixed mindset commonly exhibits itself as the belief that 
abilities are stable and unchanging, and individuals with a fixed mindset tend to 
believe that a person has a set amount of potential for a certain task. A person with a 
fixed mindset would endorse the statement “I can’t change my intelligence.” Children 
with a fixed mindset are prone to the helpless response pattern because they tend to 
view challenges as insurmountable tasks, which they interpret as indicative of low 
ability (Dweck & Leggett, 1988).
In contrast, those with a growth mindset, originally called an incremental theory of 
intelligence, believe that intelligence is malleable and can be cultivated and developed 
with effort and experience, despite differences in aptitude, interest, or personality 
(Dweck, 1998). A growth mindset has been linked to higher academic achievement, 
taking more challenging courses, and college retention (Yeager et al., 2019). A person 
with a growth mindset would endorse the statement “I believe I can change my intel-
ligence.” Children with a growth mindset are more likely to have a mastery-oriented 
pattern, which is more adaptive to learning, because they maintain positive affect 
toward the task and may even increase their strategy use (Dweck & Leggett, 1988). 
Students who hold a growth mindset have been found to endorse stronger learning 
goals and make fewer helpless attributions (Blackwell et al., 2007). It is important to 
note that mindsets are domain specific; for example, someone could have a growth 
mindset about their math skills, but a fixed mindset about their basketball skills 
(Dweck, 2006).
Mindsets are often discussed as something one has; however, in practice, mindsets 
are situation dependent (Dweck, 2017), and all individuals have both growth and fixed 
mindsets at different times. There are certain events, circumstances, or people who 
influence our mindsets; for example, a situation where one feels judged, or where 
mistakes are not allowed, may trigger a fixed mindset (Dweck, 2017). Thus, mindset 
is highly influenced by environment and therefore provides a potential avenue for 
psychological professions to promote a growth mindset throughout the developmental 
years.

4 
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 00(0)
As children age, a rise in social comparison, identity development, increasing lev-
els of self-evaluation, and environmental structures, such as grades, may influence 
student’s mindsets to become more fixed (Dweck, 1999). Associations between mind-
sets and academic achievement have been found to be strongest during the early teen 
years (Costa & Faria, 2018). Particularly given the vulnerabilities associated with 
early adolescence, including high level of self-focus and fear of embarrassment, ado-
lescents with a fixed mindset may reduce their academic efforts in an attempt to pro-
tect their egos (Dweck, 2006). Thus, early groundwork to facilitate increased influence 
of a growth mindset during this critical developmental period may motivate students, 
particularly those who are more vulnerable, to continue to invest in their goals (Yeager 
et al., 2019).
Mindset and Motivation
Mindset theory is closely associated with theories of motivation (Dweck, 2017). 
Although the relationship between motivation and academic achievement has been 
considered to be one-directional, with motivation influencing academic achievement 
(Wigfield & Wagner, 2007), other researchers have posited that motivation and 
achievement have a reciprocal relationship (Deci et al., 2001; Dweck & Master, 2009), 
whereby academic successes and failures impact motivation and motivation in turn 
impacts achievement (Saunders, 2013). For example, special education students who 
experienced repeated academic failures had lower self-efficacy (Hampton, 1996), and 
low self-efficacy may contribute to decreased willingness to attempt a challenging 
task and/or sustain effort, further increasing the likelihood of academic failures. The 
beliefs a student holds about their ability to learn and grow may be a key factor in 
determining which students are willing to attempt challenging tasks to work toward 
academic success and which students are not.
Mindsets appear to be one of many factors that influence grades for children 
(Yeager & Dweck, 2020). In a meta-analysis of the mindset literature and academic 
achievement, Costa and Faria (2018) found that students with a growth mindset were 
more likely to obtain higher grades in verbal and quantitative subjects and have higher 
overall achievement. Fixed mindset students also showed a positive association with 
specific verbal and quantitative subjects, but at a lower magnitude than their growth 
mindset peers. Yet these relationships were often of a low to moderate strength; thus, 
although an important component for academic outcomes, the influence of mindset is 
complex, and possibly most influential due to the impact it has on motivational factors 
such as reaction to failure, persistence and level of effort, and expectations of success, 
which ultimately influence academic outcomes.
Mechanisms of Mindsets
Reaction to failure. A growth mindset allows students to see challenges and failures as 
separate from their actual competency or personality, therefore students with a growth 
mindset tend to benefit from mistakes and feedback, seek help when they need it, and

Kapasi and Pei 
5
learn from failure (Dweck, 2017). On the other hand, those with a fixed mindset strug-
gle to see opportunity in failure because they are afraid of showing inadequacy 
(Dweck, 2017). For individuals with fixed mindsets, failure is believed to reflect who 
they are as a person, and so individuals with a fixed mindset are generally more vul-
nerable to helplessness when they fail because they do not believe their abilities can 
improve. Individuals with fixed mindsets may react to failure with more negative 
affect and fewer constructive strategies than those with a growth mindset (Zhao & 
Dweck, 1994). Individuals with a fixed mindset are also primarily outcomes-focused. 
In a study using EEG technology where individuals completed a task and then were 
given feedback, those with a fixed mindset exhibited the strongest attentional response 
when they were told whether they were right or wrong, not when they were offered 
strategies for improvement (Mangels et al., 2006).
Persistence and level of effort. Having a growth mindset about intelligence in middle 
school can predict higher grades, which can be attributed to positive beliefs about the 
value of persistence, and a willingness to respond to challenges with increased effort 
and helpful strategies (Blackwell et al., 2007; Sarrasin et al., 2018). Blackwell et al. 
(2007) examined the impact of beliefs regarding intelligence. They found students 
with a growth mindset experienced improved math performance over 2 years of junior 
high school compared to students who held fixed mindset. These growth mindset stu-
dents demonstrated more effort-based strategies in response to failure, which conse-
quently boosted their math achievement.
Expectations of success. Expectancy beliefs (i.e., beliefs about expectancy for success) 
are another key component of a growth mindset. Especially in groups of students who 
typically hold low expectations for themselves, such as low-income students and 
females in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) courses, a 
growth mindset can bolster expectations, and in doing so create the motivational con-
text that helps these students achieve academic success. For example, Degol et al. 
(2018) found that student’s growth mindsets predicted a higher value of math to the 
student, and task values mediated the pathway from growth mindset to higher STEM 
career aspirations. Notably, females and males with fixed mindsets had comparable 
math grades; however, females with a growth mindset had higher grades than males 
with a growth mindset. This difference was due to females having higher expectancy 
beliefs than males, which suggests that expectancy beliefs about math abilities are an 
important factor in math performance for female students (Degol et al., 2018).
Similar to students who face gender stereotypes, low-income students may be less 
likely to have positive expectations for success given their life experiences. A growth 
mindset may be one factor can lessen the impact of socio-economic status on aca-
demic achievement. A study by Claro et al. (2016) found that, although high school 
students from lower-income families were less likely to hold a growth mindset than 
wealthy students, those lower-income students who did have a growth mindset showed 
achievement in language and math scores comparable to high-income peers with a

6 
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 00(0)
fixed mindset, suggesting that a growth mindset may act as a buffer between academic 
achievement and poverty (Claro et al., 2016).
The influence of mindset is most associated with achievement among those who 
are facing challenges, which is relevant for school psychologists who often work with 
these students. In order to best help these students, it is important for psychologists to 
not only understand the psychological and behavioral influences of mindsets, but also 
how to use mindset theory as a form of intervention.
Mindset Interventions
Mindset interventions educate students about their brain and its capacity for growth 
and development, with the aim of fostering a growth mindset and ultimately influenc-
ing positive outcomes, such as academic achievement (Yeager & Dweck, 2020). Often 
mindset interventions (e.g., www.mindsetworks.com) are delivered to students in 
schools through videos, workshops, or a written explanation that highlights the ability 
of the brain to change and grow. Teaching students about neuroplasticity and the 
potential for growth has an influence on their beliefs, which in turn has an overall posi-
tive effect on motivation and achievement (Sarrasin et al., 2018). In order to promote 
a growth mindset in students, mindset interventions often use metaphors such as “the 
brain is like a muscle – it gets stronger (and smarter) when you exercise it” (Yeager & 
Dweck, 2020, p. 1277).
Research Evidence
Solid evidence exists that supports the benefits of mindset interventions (Yeager & 
Dweck, 2020). In a meta-analysis of studies that taught neuroplasticity to induce a 
growth mindset in a variety of participants (Sarrasin et al., 2018), researchers found 
that targeting students’ beliefs about the malleability of their abilities by way of teach-
ing about neuroplasticity had positive impacts on motivation, achievement, and brain 
activity. The impacts were most prominent for math achievement for at-risk youth 
(Sarrasin et al., 2018).
In one notable intervention study, seventh-grade students who were taught about 
growth mindsets throughout eight 25-minute lessons showed enhanced motivation in 
math class, based on teacher reports, and, consequently, these students maintained 
math performance over a 2-year period, in contrast to a control group who demon-
strated a decline in math performance (Blackwell et al., 2007). Similarly, when low-
income seventh grade students were mentored by college students and taught to view 
intelligence as malleable, they earned significantly higher reading and math scores 
than students in the control condition (Good et al., 2003). Researchers also found a 
decreased gender-gap for math performance; females who learned about the malleabil-
ity of intelligence earned significantly higher math standardized test scores than 
females in the control condition (Good et al., 2003).
Mindset interventions do not need to be long or particularly intensive to have ben-
efits, as evidenced by a large-scale study of ninth-grade students in the USA (the

Kapasi and Pei 
7
National Study for Learning Mindsets) (Yeager et al., 2019). The researchers found 
that an online growth mindset intervention that was less than an hour in length led to 
improved grades for lower-achieving students and increased the rate at which students 
chose to stay in a harder math class (Yeager et al., 2019). Likewise, a 45-minute online 
mindset intervention increased growth mindsets of low-income, 10th grade female 
students immediately following the intervention and at 4-month follow-up. Moreover, 
the researchers found that having a growth mindset indirectly affected student’s moti-
vation, learning efficacy, and grades (Burnette et al., 2018). These research studies 
exemplify the evidence that mindset interventions can be beneficial for learning and 
academic success.
Intervention Considerations
Mindset interventions offer a cost-effective, time-efficient tool that can be imple-
mented into schools (Yeager & Walton, 2011). School psychologists can promote the 
use of mindset interventions to booster student learning and potential. Importantly, 
certain conditions are essential to consider when implementing a mindset intervention 
to optimize benefits and increase positive outcomes.
First, mindset interventions have been shown to be most effective when growth 
is described alone, with no reference to fixed mindsets (Yeager et al., 2016). 
Second, mindset theory was originally called implicit theories because the under-
lying belief is not explicitly activated or necessarily in conscious awareness. This 
is a key factor which has often been neglected by the surge of interventions that 
attempt to change mindset by traditional teaching methods. The best interventions 
are autonomy-supportive, not didactic, and the intervention messages feel incorpo-
rated into the learning environment (Yeager & Dweck, 2020). Some examples of 
stealthy interventions include incorporating mindset information into written 
assignments (Yeager et al., 2019), courses (Blackwell et al., 2007), or mentorship 
experiences (Good et al., 2003).
Notably, growth mindset interventions encourage participants to consider theirs, 
and others, developmental potentials, but do not make any suggestions as to the mag-
nitude or ease of that change (Yeager & Dweck, 2020). Therefore, when implementing 
mindset interventions, school psychologists should be cautious that students do not 
receive the wrong messaging that their abilities can develop easily or infinitely. This 
messaging could lead to distrust or disappointment in students.
Additionally, the role of the environment is crucial in fostering a growth mind-
set. Indeed, Yeager et al. (2019) found that it was the combined importance of belief 
change (i.e., mindset) and school environment (i.e., peer norms) that influenced 
sustained benefits of a mindset intervention. Thus, mindset interventions that 
deliver messaging about growth without embedding the same messaging in the 
school and classroom environment will be unlikely to see positive results (Yeager 
et al., 2019).

8 
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 00(0)
Mindsets and Children With Learning Disabilities
Researchers have found that mindset interventions especially benefit low-achieving 
students (Paunesku et al., 2015), and although there may be many reasons why a stu-
dent is low-achieving, one factor may be the presence of a learning disability. Most 
research in mindsets has been conducted with typically developing populations, but 
preliminary work has shown support for the application of mindset theory and mindset 
interventions in learning disability populations (e.g., Rhew et al., 2018).
School psychologists often work with children with learning differences who 
require supports, and it is important to acknowledge the differences in beliefs that 
these children may have in comparison to their typically developing peers. Expectations 
of success, reaction to failure, and level of persistence and effort all present differently 
in learning disability populations. Often students with learning disabilities have expe-
rienced a history of repeated failures (Grolnick & Ryan, 1990; Licht, 1983), and pat-
terns of failure can foster a belief that one’s competence is low, and failure is inevitable. 
When academic experiences are full of struggle, students with learning disabilities 
may not expect success or believe that they have any control over their achievement 
outcomes, ultimately decreasing levels of effort and persistence, and fostering low 
self-confidence (Gans et al., 2003; Nunez et al., 2005; Stone & May, 2002). Low self-
confidence in students with learning disabilities, in turn, reduces motivation to partici-
pate in, and persist through, academic challenges (Morgan et al., 2008). When students 
do not expect to do well because they believe they lack competence, they may 
develop patterns of helplessness. In one study, children with learning disabilities 
were found to display deficits in all three areas of helplessness assessed: motiva-
tional deficits (i.e., low effort), cognitive deficits (i.e., hopelessness), and depressed 
affect (Sideridis, 2003). A growth mindset acts a protective factor against developing 
a sense of helplessness (Dweck, 2017).
Influence of Others
A low sense of competence may be fostered by parents’ and teachers’ responses to 
children with learning disabilities. One study found that pre-service teachers had more 
positive feedback and lower levels of frustration when students with learning disabili-
ties displayed low levels of effort compared to other students (Woodcock & Vialle, 
2016); however, by showing more sympathy and providing positive feedback for stu-
dents with specific learning disabilities who expend low levels of effort, they may be 
unintentionally communicating the belief that these students are not capable of higher 
achievement, and they do not hold high expectations for them (Woodcock & Vialle, 
2016).
Encouragingly, having a teacher with a growth mindset may be a protective factor 
for children with disabilities; teacher’s mindsets remained constant in a study that used 
scenarios including different genders and disabilities (Gutshall, 2013). Adopting a 
growth mindset allows people to see the potential in all children (Dweck, 2017).

Kapasi and Pei 
9
Interventions
Students with specific learning disabilities can respond positively to a growth mindset 
intervention (Hartmann, 2013). In a study that investigated mindsets in students with 
learning disabilities, grade six to eight students from an urban school district in the 
USA were given a mindset intervention (Rhew et al., 2018). The researchers found 
that those in the growth mindset intervention group significantly improved in their 
motivation for reading and willingness to attempt tasks related to reading in compari-
son to a control group (Rhew et al., 2018).
Although this early work fosters optimism for the potential of this approach for 
children with learning disabilities, this is a diverse population. Thus, even as modern 
knowledge of brain plasticity, new technology, and innovative research reveal that 
individuals with learning disabilities are capable of growth and development, this will 
look different for different individuals. Believing intelligence to be malleable does 
not mean that everyone has the same potential or that everyone will learn with 
equal ease—it means that ability can be further developed for each unique individual 
(Blackwell et al., 2007). Thus, implementation of approaches that foster increased 
motivation and promote competency requires careful consideration of what realistic 
expectations may be, and ways in which success can be created in ways that are well 
suited to each child. School psychologists are crucial in brokering this process. For 
instance, children with learning difficulties may benefit more from praise that focuses 
on finding the right learning strategies, rather than praise for effort. In her book, 
Dweck provides an example of how to foster a growth mindset for children with learn-
ing disabilities: “Everyone learns in a different way. Let’s keep trying to find the way 
that works for you” (Dweck, 2017, p. 181).
Mindsets and Mental Health
In addition to working with students with learning differences, school psychologists 
also often work with students with mental health challenges. An association between 
mindsets and mental health has been established (Yeager & Dweck, 2020), and 
research in this field continues to emerge. The extent to which people believe change 
is possible in domains related to mental health impact their ability to engage in treat-
ment (Burnette et al., 2020), actively cope (Burnette et al., 2020), self-regulate emo-
tions in an adaptive way (Schroder et al., 2015; Tamir et al., 2007), and experience 
symptom reduction (Higgins et al., 2015; Schroder et al., 2017).
Fixed mindsets are associated with increased mental health problems. Schleider 
et al. (2015) found that the association between youth fixed mindset and mental health 
problems remained regardless of type of mental health issue (e.g., internalizing vs. 
externalizing). When faced with adversity, youth with fixed mental health-related 
mindsets may be more likely to be helpless about their ability to change, and this can 
increase the risk for psychopathology (Schleider et al., 2015).
Alternatively, growth mindsets predict more positive emotional experiences 
(Burnette et al., 2013). In a recent meta-analysis, Burnette et al. (2020) found that

10 
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 00(0)
growth mindsets had a negative relationship to psychological distress (i.e., symptoms 
of depression, anxiety, stress). Furthermore, applying mindset theory to anxiety, 
beliefs about the malleability of anxiety were found to moderate the association 
between stressful life events, psychological distress, and maladaptive coping strate-
gies, indicating that having a growth anxiety mindset may promote mental health resil-
ience (Schroder et al., 2017).
Growth mindsets can buffer mental health problems because of the belief against 
the fixedness of a person’s mental state (Burnette et al., 2020). For example, middle-
school students who reported that they believed that emotions were in their control 
reported fewer depressive symptoms (Romero et al., 2014). Moreover, students with 
growth mindsets who reported low well-being in sixth grade were more likely than 
students with fixed mindsets to increase in their self-reported well-being by the end of 
eighth grade (Romero et al., 2014). These results suggest that beliefs about the malle-
ability of emotions may be similar to beliefs about the malleability of intelligence in 
that they are most influential for students who experience emotional challenges.
Interventions
Brief online mindset interventions that include content about different types of mind-
sets, including personality, intelligence, and self-regulation, have been found to be 
effective in reducing depression and anxiety in adolescents (Schleider & Weisz, 2018). 
In one study, a brief, online mindset intervention called Growing Minds (www.pro-
jectgrowingminds.com) was delivered to adolescent females in rural communities. 
Participants who completed the intervention reported reduced depressive symptoms 
compared to a control group from baseline to 4-month follow-up (Schleider et al., 
2020). One potential explanation for this effect is the concept of emotional tolerance; 
a growth mindset encourages confronting and tolerating emotional distress and pro-
motes resilience, whereas fixed mindsets discourage feeling distressing emotions such 
as frustration and disappointment (Schroder, 2021).
The core concept of mindset theory emphasizes the impact of beliefs, which can be 
found in another type of intervention: cognitive-behaviour therapy (CBT). School psy-
chologists are likely already familiar with CBT and can apply these same tenets to the 
belief of malleability of abilities. In CBT, therapists work with their clients to under-
stand and examine core beliefs, and the mindset one holds can be described as a core 
belief. When students learn that their intelligence is not fixed, but instead that their 
brain can learn and develop, their belief is challenged, and this can lead to changes in 
their thinking and behaviors (Dweck, 2017). One area that has been researched is the 
relationship between mindsets and cognitive reappraisal, which is the ability to change 
the way a person thinks about an event, and is an important component of CBT 
(Schroder et al., 2015). Growth mindsets are positively correlated with the use of cog-
nitive reappraisal strategies, whereas fixed mindsets are related to avoidance strategies 
(Schroder et al., 2015), and reduced use of cognitive reappraisal (De Castella et al., 
2013).

Kapasi and Pei 
11
When delivering mental health interventions, understanding an individual’s mind-
set may present an important area for intervention. School psychologists can use a 
mindset questionnaire that specifically asks students about their mindset to better 
understand their beliefs. Examples of mindset questionnaire items can be found in the 
appendix of Schroder et al. (2015). Fostering student’s growth mindsets regarding 
their mental health is consistent with the importance of eliciting hope in therapy to 
promote readiness for change (Howell, 2017 ).
Without an underlying belief that growth and change are possible, it is likely that 
counseling and intervention efforts will not be as effective as possible (Schleider et al., 
2020). Applying mindset theory to the field of mental health is a promising avenue that 
may describe differences in student’s resilience, mental health symptoms, sense of 
well-being, and treatment effectiveness.
The Role of School Psychologists
Promoting a growth mindset in students is a worthwhile endeavor to help students 
experience academic success and mental wellness. In particular, fostering a growth 
mindset in vulnerable students, including those with lower expectations of success, 
may help them persist through challenges (Yeager et al., 2019). School psychologists 
can provide support to students and school staff by using their research and clinical 
skills to support (1) optimal evidence informed implementation in classroom settings, 
(2) tailored intervention to specialized student groups, and (3) a growth mindset 
culture within the school environment.
Evidence Informed Implementation
School psychologists play a vital role in bringing evidence-based practices to school 
settings. When providing consultation and recommendations to schools, school psy-
chologists can rely on their knowledge of evidence-based practice to provide accurate 
information. Recently, Dweck has addressed an increasing concern about “false 
growth mindsets” (Dweck, 2017), which has led to an incorrect implementation of 
mindset theory in school settings. Areas to consider in order to avoid “false growth 
mindsets” include fostering purposeful effort, providing meaningful praise, and not 
blaming children for their mindsets.
When fostering a growth mindset, focus should not be just on effort, but rather 
purposeful and meaningful effort. Sternberg (2005) noted that the major factor that 
determines whether people achieve expertise is not prior ability, but rather purposeful 
engagement. Despite the good intentions of parents and teachers, by praising success 
on easy tasks and providing sympathetic assistance, children may infer they have low 
ability, and that they should expect failure (Woodcock & Vialle, 2011). Effort needs to 
lead to outcomes, and students need to be able to connect their effort to achievement 
to foster a belief in the malleability of their abilities. When students exert effort and 
still endure failure, they may be even more inclined to attribute their failure to a per-
ceived lack of intelligence (Dweck, 2017; Rhew et al., 2018).

12 
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 00(0)
When praising effort, the praise must be meaningful, just as the effort must be 
meaningful. Therefore, praise should only be given if the child is actually exerting 
effort, and it should not given for not achieving outcomes (Dweck, 2017). Parents and 
teachers should praise students for their achievements, but ideally in a way that ties the 
outcome to the work the student put in, and not their personality attributes (e.g., “you 
studied so hard for that test and you did great on it” vs. “you are so smart”). It is impor-
tant to praise what was accomplished through practice, study, persistence, and/or good 
strategy use (Dweck, 2017). Although praise is an influential way to promote a growth 
mindset, it is not the only way to positively reinforce the student’s efforts; the same 
message can be communicated by showing interest and asking questions.
Lastly, in some school settings children are being blamed for having a fixed mind-
set as a reason for struggling to learn (Dweck, 2016). Student’s must be encouraged 
with honest and helpful feedback, advice on learning strategies, and be given opportu-
nities to revise their work and demonstrate their understanding to promote a growth 
mindset at school (Dweck, 2016). School psychologists can lessen the threat of a false 
growth mindset by communicating messaging that is in line with mindset theorist’s 
evidence-based recommendations.
Working With Students
School psychologists can identify students who may be more vulnerable to a fixed 
mindset (e.g., students with learning difficulties, mental health challenges, lower-
achieving students) as possible participants for a mindset intervention. School psy-
chologists may want to use a mindset questionnaire to measure student’s mindsets in 
order to better understand how student’s beliefs are impacting their psychological 
functioning. When working with these students, school psychologists can use mindset 
intervention methods such as those available from Brainology®, or by creating their 
own based on methods developed by researchers, such as guided reading or watching 
a video. Coupled with learning about neuroplasticity, students should also engage in 
an active form of learning such as writing letters, creating art, or teaching others. It is 
important to make the intervention active, rather than passive, to increase the likeli-
hood the participant will be persuaded by the messaging (Walton, 2014). This is called 
“saying-is-believing” and can help students internalize the growth mindset message 
(Aronson et al., 2002).
Walton (2014) notes that interventions will only effect long term outcomes if they 
are able to change recursive processes. There are key time periods where mindset 
interventions will be most beneficial; for instance, at the beginning of a new school 
year. School psychologists can keep these ideas in mind when implementing mind-
set interventions with students. At the beginning of the school year, it may serve 
school psychologists to wonder, “how might I incorporate mindset theory into 
assessments, interventions, and consultations this year to target those students who 
can most benefit?”
For instance, school psychologists may want to build in a mindset questionnaire 
into their psychoeducational assessment practices to uncover the beliefs students

Kapasi and Pei 
13
hold about their potential for change. Adding in a brief mindset questionnaire to 
assessments may provide a basis for recommendations to teachers, parents, and the 
student themselves on how to foster a growth mindset. Regardless of the implemen-
tation of a mindset questionnaire, recommendations based on the mindset literature, 
such as the importance of meaningful praise and building comfort with challenge 
and failure, are likely valuable to include in psychoeducational assessment reports 
for all students.
Promoting School Culture Changes
There are important school environment considerations that should be taken into 
account for mindset interventions to be most effective. When school psychologists are 
consulting with teachers and school staff, recommending strategies in line with growth 
mindset research will work to benefit all students.
The school climate that the students experience will impact whether students adopt 
a growth mindset (Yeager et al., 2019). Growth mindsets are heavily influenced by the 
environment, and it is likely that when students, especially low-achieving students, are 
placed in a performance-focused environment they will struggle. Indeed, one study 
found that children with learning difficulties perceived themselves to be incompetent 
only when comparing themselves to others (Renick & Harter, 1989). The environment 
of learning should strive to be non-judgmental, collaborative, and communicate the 
belief in students’ potential to grow (Dweck, 2017).
Thus far the research suggests that it is the actions of parents, teachers, and other 
adults in a child’s life that fosters a growth mindset, not whether or not the parent or 
teacher themselves have a growth mindset (Park et al., 2016; Yeager & Dweck, 2020). 
For example, teachers’ instructional practices have been found to play a role in mind-
set development as early as in grades one and two. The more teachers reported empha-
sizing performance-oriented instructional practices in the classroom, the more students 
endorsed a fixed mindset (Park et al., 2016). Therefore, if the actions of the school 
staff, parents, and peers are congruent with a belief in growth, students will be more 
likely to adopt a growth mindset. The school environment should hold students to high 
and realistic standards, and also teach them how to achieve those standards. Rhew et 
al. (2018) recommended that educators consider emphasizing a curriculum that focuses 
on perseverance, constructive feedback, and the flexibility of intelligence to incorpo-
rate a growth mindset model.
Lastly, school psychologists work with a wide variety of individuals of differing 
abilities and needs, and it is important for psychologists to consider their own mindsets 
about certain mental health concerns, disabilities, and diagnoses. Psychologists who 
genuinely believe in growth not only promote that belief, but also create situations and 
contexts conducive to gathering evidence of such growth. As school psychologists we 
contribute to school climate, and thus from this foundational level may influence 
school policies in which growth tenets are promoted for all students. This is an oppor-
tunity to identify and implement the language of growth, in a preventative, whole-
school approach. From this vantage point, school psychologists may find themselves

14 
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 00(0)
situated in a place where work with educators and within classrooms to leverage these 
ideas, along with working directly with students who may benefit greatly from mind-
set interventions.
Conclusions
School psychologists play a critical role in supporting healthy outcomes for all 
children. Although the literature related to mindset, and children with disabilities, or 
vulnerabilities, continues to emerge, the evidence to date certainly reveals the poten-
tial for this approach to be a foundational element of a school psychologist’s practice, 
permeating may aspects of their work. For instance, educators may be supported in 
building practices into classroom activities, and in interactions with students, to action 
these principles. In work with those students with the greatest needs, it is possible that 
these concepts may hold the most promise. As school psychologists, the language of 
capacity and growth can be embedded into intervention and assessment practices. 
Imagine assessment that is predicated on ways to help access strengths. In which strat-
egies are identified and strengths are celebrated—so that approaches to motivate and 
engage students are central rather than deficits alone defined. Consultations may focus 
on exceptions and successes, and actionable steps toward growth may be identified. In 
short, the school psychologist is well positioned to be the central voice shifting per-
spectives away from exclusive focus on challenges and barriers, and toward consider-
ation of alternatives. We may become the voice of possibility and potential, shifting 
perspectives such that balanced approaches that reflect awareness of the critical nature 
of motivation, become central to our work.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, 
and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of 
this article.
ORCID iD
Aamena Kapasi 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7583-7740
References
Aronson, J., Fried, C. B., & Good, C. (2002). Reducing the effects of stereotype threat on African 
American college students by shaping theories of intelligence. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 38(2), 113–125. https://doi.org/10.1006/jesp.2001.1491
Blackwell, L. S., Trzesniewski, K. H., & Dweck, C. S. (2007). Implicit theories of intelligence 
predict achievement across an adolescent transition: A longitudinal study and an interven-
tion. Child Development, 78(1), 246–263.

Kapasi and Pei 
15
Burnette, J. L., Knouse, L. E., Vavra, D. T., O’Boyle, E., & Brooks, M. A. (2020). Growth 
mindsets and psychological distress: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 77, 
101816.
Burnette, J. L., O’Boyle, E. H., VanEpps, E. M., Pollack, J. M., & Finkel, E. J. (2013). Mind-
sets matter: A meta-analytic review of implicit theories and selfregulation. Psychological 
Bulletin, 139, 655–701. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029531
Burnette, J. L., Russell, V. M., Hoyt, C. L., Orvidas, K., & Widman, L. (2018). An online growth 
mindset intervention in a sample of rural adolescent girls. British Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 88, 428–445. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjep.12192
Canning, E. A., Murphy, M. C., Emerson, K. T. U., Chatman, J. A., Dweck, C. S., & Kray, L. 
J. (2020). Cultures of genius at work: Organizational mindsets predict cultural norms, trust, 
and commitment. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 46(4), 626–642. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0146167219872473
Claro, S., Paunesku, D., & Dweck, C. S. (2016). Growth mindset tempers the effects of poverty 
on academic achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 113(31), 8664–8668. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1608207113
Costa, A., & Faria, L. (2018). Implicit theories of intelligence and academic achieve-
ment: A meta-analytic review. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 829. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2018.00829
De Castella, K., Goldin, P., Jazaieri, H., Ziv, M., Dweck, C. S., & Gross, J. J. (2013). Beliefs 
about emotion: Links to emotion regulation, well-being, and psychological distress. Basic 
and Applied Social Psychology, 35, 497–505. https://doi.org/10.1080/01973533.2013.840
632
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (2001). Extrinsic rewards and intrinsic motivation in 
education: Reconsidered once again. Review of Educational Research, 71(1), 1–27.
Degol, J. L., Wang, M. T., Zhang, Y., & Allerton, J. (2018). Do growth mindsets in math benefit 
females? Identifying pathways between gender, mindset, and motivation. Journal of Youth 
and Adolescence, 47, 976–990. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10964-017-0739-8
Dweck, C. (1998). The development of early self-conceptions: Their relevance for motivational 
processes. In J. Heckhausen & C. Dweck (Eds.), Motivation and self regulation across the 
life span (pp. 257–280). Cambridge University Press.
Dweck, C. (2006). Mindset: The new psychology of success. Random House.
Dweck, C. (2016, January 11). Recognizing and overcoming false growth mindset. Edutopia. 
https://www.edutopia.org/blog/recognizing-overcoming-false-growth-mindset-
carol-dweck
Dweck, C. (2017). Mindset: The new psychology of success (updated ed.). Random House.
Dweck, C., & Master, A. (2009). Self theories and motivation: Student’s beliefs about intel-
ligence. In K. R. Wentzel & A. Wigfield (Eds.), Handbook of motivation at school 
(pp. 123–140). Routledge.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self theories: Their role in motivation, personality, and development. 
Taylor & Francis.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and personal-
ity. Psychological Review, 95, 256–273. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.95.2.256
Elliott, E. S., & Dweck, C. S. (1988). Goals: An approach to motivation and achievement. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54(1), 5–12. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-
3514.54.1.5

16 
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 00(0)
Gans, A. M., Kenny, M. C., & Ghany, D. L. (2003). Comparing the self-concept of students 
with and without learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 36, 287–295.
Good, C., Aronson, J., & Inzlicht, M. (2003). Improving adolescents’ standardized test per-
formance: An intervention to reduce the effects of stereotype threat. Journal of Applied 
Developmental Psychology, 24, 645–662.
Grolnick, W. S., & Ryan, R. M. (1990). Self-perceptions, motivation, and adjustment in chil-
dren with learning disabilities: A multiple group comparison study. Journal of Learning 
Disabilities, 23(3), 177–184.
Gutshall, C. A. (2013). Teacher’s mindsets for students with and without disabilities. Psychology 
in the Schools, 50(10), 1073–1083.
Hampton, N. Z. (1996). The relationship of learning disabilities to the sources of 
self-efficacy expectations, and academic achievement in high school student’s efficacy 
[ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global]. https://www.proquest.com/openview/7b65e140
9b6aee58c0284ae3999a7aea/1?pq-origsite=gscholar&cbl=18750&diss=y
Hartmann, G. M. (2013). The relationship between mindset and students with specific learn-
ing disabilities [Doctoral dissertation, Humboldt State University]. ProQuest Dissertations 
Publishing.
Higgins, N. C., Bailey, S. J., LaChapelle, D. L., Harman, K., & Hadjistavropoulos, T. (2015). 
Coping styles, pain expressiveness, and implicit theories of chronic pain. The Journal of 
Psychology, 149, 737–750. https://doi.org/10.1080/00223980.2014.977759
Howell, A. J. (2017). Believing in change: Reviewing the role of inplicit theories in psychologi-
cal dysfunction. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 36(6), 437–460.
Licht, B. G. (1983). Cognitive–motivational factors that contribute to the achievement of learn-
ing-disabled children. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 16, 483–490.
Mangels, J. A., Butterfield, B., Lamb, J., Good, C., & Dweck, C. S. (2006). Why do beliefs 
about intelligence influence learning success? A social cognitive neuroscience model. 
Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 1(2), 75–86.
Morgan, P. L., Fuchs, D., Compton, D. L., Cordray, D. S., & Fuchs, L. S. (2008). Does early 
reading failure decrease children’s reading motivation? Journal of Learning Disabilities, 
41(5), 387–404. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022219408321112
Nunez, J. C., Gonzalez-Pienda, J. A., Gonzalez-Pumariega, S., Roces, C., Alvarez, L., Gonzalez, 
P., Cabanach, R. G., Valle, A., & Rodriguez, S. (2005). Subgroups of attributional profiles 
in students with learning difficulties and their relation to self-concept and academic goals. 
Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 20(2), 86–97. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
5826.2005.00124.x
Park, D., Gunderson, E. A., Tsukayama, E., Levine, S. C., & Beilock, S. L. (2016). Young 
children’s motivational frameworks and math achievement: Relation to teacher-reported 
instructional practices, but not teacher theory of intelligence. Journal of Education & 
Psychology, 108(3), 300–313. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000064
Paunesku, D., Walton, G. M., Romero, C., Smith, E. N., Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. 
(2015). Mind-set interventions are a scalable treatment for academic underachievement. 
Psychological Science, 26(6), 784–793. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797615571017
Renick, M. J., & Harter, S. (1989). Impact of social comparisons on the developing self-
perceptions of learning disabled students. Journal of Education & Psychology, 81, 
631–638.
Rhew, E., Piro, J. S., Goolkasian, P., & Cosentino, P. (2018). The effects of a growth mindset 
on self-efficacy and motivation. Cogent Education, 5(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/23
31186x.2018.1492337

Kapasi and Pei 
17
Romero, C., Master, A., Paunesku, D., Dweck, C. S., & Gross, J. J. (2014). Academic and emo-
tional functioning in middle school: The role of implicit theories. Emotion, 14(2), 227–234. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0035490
Sarrasin, J. B., Nenciovici, L., Foisy, L. M. B., Allaire-Duquette, G., Riopel, M., & Masson, S. 
(2018). Effects of teaching the concept of neuroplasticity to induce a growth mindset on 
motivation, achievement, and brain activity: A meta-analysis. Trends in Neuroscience and 
Education, 12, 22–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tine.2018.07.003
Saunders, S. A. (2013). The impact of a growth mindset intervention on the reading achieve-
ment of at-risk adolescent students [Doctoral dissertation, University of Virginia]. ProQuest 
Dissertations Publishing.
Schleider, J., & Weisz, J. (2018). A single-session growth mindset intervention for adoles-
cent anxiety and depression: 9-month outcomes of a randomized trial. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 59(2), 160–170. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12811
Schleider, J. L., Abel, M. R., & Weisz, J. R. (2015). Implicit theories and youth mental health 
problems: A random-effects meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 35, 1–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2014.11.001
Schleider, J. L., Burnette, J. L., Widman, L., Hoyt, C., & Prinstein, M. J. (2020). Randomized 
trial of a single-session growth mind-set intervention for rural adolescents’ internalizing 
and externalizing problems. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 49(5), 
660–672. https://doi.org/10.1080/15374416.2019.16221234
Schroder, H. S. (2021). Mindsets in the clinic: Applying mindset theory to clinical psychology. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 83, 101957. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2020.101957
Schroder, H. S., Dawood, S., Yalch, M. M., Donnellan, M. B., & Moser, J. S. (2015). The role 
of implicit theories in mental health symptoms, emotion regulation, and hypothetical treat-
ment choices in college students. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 39, 120–139.
Schroder, H. S., Yalch, M. M., Dawood, S., Callahan, C. P., Brent Donnellan, M., & Moser, 
J. S. (2017). Growth mindset of anxiety buffers the link between stressful life events and 
psychological distress and coping strategies. Personality and Individual Differences, 110, 
23–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2017.01.016
Schunk, D. H., Pintrich, P. K., & Meece, J. L. (2008). Motivation in education: Theory, research, 
and applications (3rd ed.). Pearson Education Inc.
Sideridis, G. D. (2003). On the origins of helpless behavior of students with learning disabilities: 
Avoidance motivation? International Journal of Educational Research, 39(4–5), 497–517.
Sternberg, R. J. (2005). Intelligence, competence, and expertise. In C. Dweck & A. Elliot (Eds.), 
Handbook of competence and motivation (pp. 15–30). The Guilford Press.
Stone, C. A., & May, A. L. (2002). The accuracy of academic self-evaluations in adolescents 
with learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 35, 370–383.
Tamir, M., John, O. P., Srivastava, S., & Gross, J. J. (2007). Implicit theories of emotion: 
Affective and social outcomes across a major life transition. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 92, 731–744. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.92.4.731
Walton, G. M. (2014). The new science of wise psychological interventions. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 23(1), 73–82.
Wigfield, A., & Wagner, A. L. (2007). Competence, motivation and identity development dur-
ing adolescence. In A. J. Elliot & C. S. Dweck (Eds.), Handbook of competence and moti-
vation (pp. 222–239). Guilford Press.

18 
Canadian Journal of School Psychology 00(0)
Woodcock, S., & Vialle, W. (2011). Are we exacerbating students’ learning disabilities? An 
investigation of preservice teachers’ attributions of the educational outcomes of students 
with learning disabilities. Annals of Dyslexia, 61, 223–241.
Woodcock, S., & Vialle, W. (2016). An examination of pre-service teachers’ attributions for stu-
dents with specific learning difficulties. Learning and Individual Differences, 45, 252–259.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2020). What can be learned from growth mindset controversies? 
American Psychologist, 75(9), 1269–1284.
Yeager, D. S., Hanselman, P., Walton, G. M., Murray, J. S., Crosnoe, R., Muller, C., Tipton, 
E., Schneider, B., Hulleman, C. S., Hinojosa, C. P., Paunesku, D., Romero, C., Flint, K., 
Roberts, A., Trott, J., Iachan, R., Buontempo, J., Yang, S. M., Carvalho, C. M., . . . Dweck, 
C. S. (2019). A national experiment reveals where a growth mindset improves achieve-
ment. Nature, 573, 364–369. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1466-y
Yeager, D. S., Romero, C., Paunesku, D., Hulleman, C. S., Schneider, B., Hinojosa, C., Lee, H. 
Y., O’Brien, J., Flint, K., Roberts, A., Trott, J., Greene, D., Walton, G. M., & Dweck, C. 
S. (2016). Using design thinking to improve psychological interventions: The case of the 
growth mindset during the transition to high school. Journal of Education & Psychology, 
108(3), 374–391.
Yeager, D. S., & Walton, G. M. (2011). Social-psychological interventions in education. Review 
of Educational Research, 81(2), 267–301.
Zanin, A. C., Adame, E. A., Niess, L. C., & Martinez, L. V. (2020). Negotiating identity and 
the development of incremental mindset in a female adolescent sport context. Journal of 
Applied Sport Psychology. 1–25. https://doi.org/10.1080/10413200.2020.1783389
Zhao, W., & Dweck, C. S. (1994). Implicit theories and vulnerability to depression-like 
responses [Unpublished manuscript]. Columbia University.
Author Biographies
Aamena Kapasi (R.Psych., PhD) is a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Alberta. She 
completed her Ph.D. in School and Clinical Child Psychology in 2020. Aamena’s research is 
focused on supports and interventions for individuals with FASD. She has a passion for both 
research and clinical work and children, youth, and families. 
Jacqueline Pei (R. Psych., PhD) is a Professor in the Department of Educational Psychology 
and Assistant Clinical Professor in the Department of Pediatrics at the University of Alberta, 
and Senior Research Lead for the Canada FASD Research Network. Her research focus includes 
identification and evaluation of interventions to support healthy outcomes for youth put at risk.