Australian teachers and school leaders' use of differentiated learning experiences as responsive teaching for students with ADHD

Kathy Gibbs
Published in: Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties, v28, pp. 18-31, 2023
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/13632752.2023.2194131

NOTE: The task listed this as "Whitaker et al. (2023)" but the actual author is Kathy Gibbs, Program Director of the Bachelor of Education at Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia.

ABSTRACT

There is a paucity of research in Australia about educators' use of differentiated instruction (DI) to support the learning of students with ADHD. This study reports on a small-scale, qualitative research using interviews with teachers and school leaders to identify how they use DI as an effective teaching instruction for students with ADHD. Findings showed that teachers and school leaders have a good understanding of ADHD, teachers use DI as an effective teaching practice to enhance learning for this student group and ensure the classroom environment is safe and secure. However, they do not adjust assessments for students with ADHD. School leaders are not clear how teachers differentiate assessments or adapt the classroom environment. These results highlight the need for further research at the teacher and teacher educator level to ensure teaching practices are effective in reducing unwanted behaviours that prevent students with ADHD achieving to their full academic potential.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.

NOTES ON CONTRIBUTORS

Kathy Gibbs has taught across a range of disciplines and held several high-profile teaching positions in schools in Australia. Dr Gibbs is currently the Program Director of the Bachelor of Education in the School of Education and Professional Studies (EPS) at Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia. Her areas of research include the schooling experience for students with ADHD and differentiated instruction as a quality teaching practice suited to all students in mainstream classrooms. She is also a member of the Board of Directors for ADHD Australia.

[Note: Full text of methods, results, and discussion sections was not fully accessible due to journal paywall. The above represents the complete abstract and author information retrieved from the publisher's website.]
